docs/integrations/react/api.md, before:

---
title: API
---

## Providers

### `DirectionProvider`

Provides a direction to all children using context. Accepts the following optional props.

- `direction` (`ltr | rtl`) - Explicit direction to use. Should not be used with `value`.
- `inline` (`boolean`) - Render an inline element instead of block.
- `value` (`string`) - Locale aware string to deduce the direction from. Should not be used with
  `direction`.

```tsx
import { DirectionProvider } from '@aesthetic/react';

<DirectionProvider direction="rtl">
  <Component />
</DirectionProvider>;
```

### `ThemeProvider`

Provides the current theme to the entire application and must be rendered at the root. Accepts the
following optional props.

- `name` (`string`) - Explicit name of a theme to provide. If undefined, will automatically
  determine the best theme.

```tsx
import { ThemeProvider } from '@aesthetic/react';

<ThemeProvider>
  <App />
</ThemeProvider>;
```

### `ContextualThemeProvider`

Provides a theme to a target component tree and will override the root theme. Requires the following
prop.

- `name` (`string`) - Explicit name of a theme to provide.

```tsx
import { ThemeProvider, ContextualThemeProvider } from '@aesthetic/react';

<ThemeProvider>
  <Component />

  <ContextualThemeProvider name="night">
    <Component />
  </ContextualThemeProvider>
</ThemeProvider>;
```

> Renders a wrapping `div` with CSS variables under the hood.

## Hooks

### `useCss`

> useCss(rule: Rule, options?: RenderOptions): Rule

Renders a low-level rule object and returns a class name. If passing options, be sure to memoize to
avoid unnecessary renders!

```tsx
import { useCss } from '@aesthetic/react';

const styles = { display: 'block' };

export default function Component() {
  const options = useMemo(() => ({ deterministic: true }), []);
  const className = useCss(styles, options);

  return <div className={className} />;
}
```

### `useDirection`

> useDirection(): Direction

Returns the current direction, either `ltr` or `rtl`.

```tsx
import { useDirection } from '@aesthetic/react';

export default function Component() {
  const direction = useDirection();

  return <div />;
}
```

### `useStyles`

> useStyles(styleSheet: LocalSheet): StyleResultGenerator

Requires a local style sheet and returns a function to use for class name generation.

```tsx
import { useStyles } from '@aesthetic/react';
import styleSheet from './styles';

export default function Component() {
  const cx = useStyles(styleSheet);

  return <div className={cx('element')} />;
}
```

### `useTheme`

> useTheme(): Theme<ElementStyles\>

Returns the current theme or throws an error.

```tsx
import { useTheme } from '@aesthetic/react';

export default function Component() {
  const theme = useTheme();

  return <div />;
}
```

## HOCs

### `withDirection`

> withDirection()(component: React.ComponentType): React.FunctionComponent

Wraps a component to pass the current direction as a `direction` prop.

```tsx
import { withDirection, WithDirectionWrappedProps } from '@aesthetic/react';

function Component({ direction }: WithDirectionWrappedProps) {
  return <div />;
}

export default withDirection()(Component);
```

### `withStyles`

> withStyles(styleSheet: LocalSheet)(component: React.ComponentType): React.FunctionComponent

Wraps a component with a local style sheet to pass a `compose` prop (renamed to `cx`) to use for
class name generation.

```tsx
import { withStyles, WithStylesWrappedProps } from '@aesthetic/react';
import styleSheet from './styles';

function Component({ compose: cx }: WithStylesWrappedProps<'element'>) {
  return <div className={cx('element')} />;
}

export default withStyles(styleSheet)(Component);
```

### `withTheme`

> withTheme()(component: React.ComponentType): React.FunctionComponent

Wraps a component to pass the current theme as a `theme` prop.

```tsx
import { withTheme, WithThemeWrappedProps } from '@aesthetic/react';

function Component({ theme }: WithThemeWrappedProps) {
  return <div />;
}

export default withTheme()(Component);
```

## Other

### `createStyled`

> createStyled(type: React.ElementType | React.ComponentType, styleSheet: ElementStyles |
> LocalSheetFactory): StyledComponent

Creates and returns a styled component using the provided style sheet.

```tsx
import { createStyled } from '@aesthetic/react';

const Button = createStyled('button', (css) => ({
  display: 'inline-flex',
  textAlign: 'center',
  padding: css.var('spacing-md'),
}));

const BlockButton = createStyled(Button, {
  display: 'flex',
  width: '100%',
});
```

## Server-side

### `renderToStyleElements`

> renderToStyleElements(engine: Engine): React.ReactNode

Renders [extracted styles](./ssr.md) into a collection of `style` elements. Elements must be
rendered in the HTML document.

```ts
const elements = renderToStyleElements(engine);
```

Commit message:

docs: Add new element and shorthand APIs.

docs/integrations/react/api.md, after:

---
title: API
---

## Providers

### `DirectionProvider`

Provides a direction to all children using context. Accepts the following optional props.

- `direction` (`ltr | rtl`) - Explicit direction to use. Should not be used with `value`.
- `inline` (`boolean`) - Render an inline element instead of block.
- `value` (`string`) - Locale aware string to deduce the direction from. Should not be used with
  `direction`.

```tsx
import { DirectionProvider } from '@aesthetic/react';

<DirectionProvider direction="rtl">
  <Component />
</DirectionProvider>;
```

### `ThemeProvider`

Provides the current theme to the entire application and must be rendered at the root. Accepts the
following optional props.

- `name` (`string`) - Explicit name of a theme to provide. If undefined, will automatically
  determine the best theme.

```tsx
import { ThemeProvider } from '@aesthetic/react';

<ThemeProvider>
  <App />
</ThemeProvider>;
```

### `ContextualThemeProvider`

Provides a theme to a target component tree and will override the root theme. Requires the following
prop.

- `name` (`string`) - Explicit name of a theme to provide.

```tsx
import { ThemeProvider, ContextualThemeProvider } from '@aesthetic/react';

<ThemeProvider>
  <Component />

  <ContextualThemeProvider name="night">
    <Component />
  </ContextualThemeProvider>
</ThemeProvider>;
```

> Renders a wrapping `div` with CSS variables under the hood.

## Hooks

### `useCss`

> useCss(rule: Rule, options?: RenderOptions): Rule

Renders a low-level rule object and returns a class name. If passing options, be sure to memoize to
avoid unnecessary renders!

```tsx
import { useCss } from '@aesthetic/react';

const styles = { display: 'block' };

export default function Component() {
  const options = useMemo(() => ({ deterministic: true }), []);
  const className = useCss(styles, options);

  return <div className={className} />;
}
```

### `useDirection`

> useDirection(): Direction

Returns the current direction, either `ltr` or `rtl`.

```tsx
import { useDirection } from '@aesthetic/react';

export default function Component() {
  const direction = useDirection();

  return <div />;
}
```

### `useStyles`

> useStyles(styleSheet: LocalSheet): StyleResultGenerator

Requires a local style sheet and returns a function to use for class name generation.

```tsx
import { useStyles } from '@aesthetic/react';
import styleSheet from './styles';

export default function Component() {
  const cx = useStyles(styleSheet);

  return <div className={cx('element')} />;
}
```

### `useTheme`

> useTheme(): Theme<ElementStyles\>

Returns the current theme or throws an error.

```tsx
import { useTheme } from '@aesthetic/react';

export default function Component() {
  const theme = useTheme();

  return <div />;
}
```

## HOCs

### `withDirection`

> withDirection()(component: React.ComponentType): React.FunctionComponent

Wraps a component to pass the current direction as a `direction` prop.

```tsx
import { withDirection, WithDirectionWrappedProps } from '@aesthetic/react';

function Component({ direction }: WithDirectionWrappedProps) {
  return <div />;
}

export default withDirection()(Component);
```

### `withStyles`

> withStyles(styleSheet: LocalSheet)(component: React.ComponentType): React.FunctionComponent

Wraps a component with a local style sheet to pass a `compose` prop (renamed to `cx`) to use for
class name generation.

```tsx
import { withStyles, WithStylesWrappedProps } from '@aesthetic/react';
import styleSheet from './styles';

function Component({ compose: cx }: WithStylesWrappedProps<'element'>) {
  return <div className={cx('element')} />;
}

export default withStyles(styleSheet)(Component);
```

### `withTheme`

> withTheme()(component: React.ComponentType): React.FunctionComponent

Wraps a component to pass the current theme as a `theme` prop.

```tsx
import { withTheme, WithThemeWrappedProps } from '@aesthetic/react';

function Component({ theme }: WithThemeWrappedProps) {
  return <div />;
}

export default withTheme()(Component);
```

## Other

### `createStyled`

> createStyled(type: React.ElementType | React.ComponentType, styleSheet: ElementStyles |
> LocalSheetFactory): StyledComponent

Creates and returns a styled component using the provided style sheet.

```tsx
import { createStyled } from '@aesthetic/react';

const Button = createStyled('button', (css) => ({
  display: 'inline-flex',
  textAlign: 'center',
  padding: css.var('spacing-md'),
}));

const BlockButton = createStyled(Button, {
  display: 'flex',
  width: '100%',
});
```

### `style`

An alias for [createElementStyles](../../dev/css-in-js/style-sheets/components).

### `styles`

An alias for [createComponentStyles](../../dev/css-in-js/style-sheets/components).

### `styled`

An alias for [createStyled](#createStyled).

### `themeStyle`

An alias for [createThemeStyles](../../dev/css-in-js/style-sheets/themes).

## Server-side

### `renderToStyleElements`

> renderToStyleElements(engine: Engine): React.ReactNode

Renders [extracted styles](./ssr.md) into a collection of `style` elements. Elements must be
rendered in the HTML document.

```ts
const elements = renderToStyleElements(engine);
```
