docs/integrations/react/styles.mdx, before:

---
title: Styling components
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

> Knowledge of [style sheets](../../dev/css-in-js/style-sheets.md) is required.

Components are styled with the `useStyles()` hook (preferred) or the `withStyles()`
higher-order-component. Both APIs require a
[style sheet](../../dev/css-in-js/style-sheets/components.md) that is conditionally rendered to CSS
to generate atomic class names.

To continue with the example found in the style sheet documentation, let's design and style a button
component. The button file would look something like the following.

```tsx {4}
import React from 'react';
import { createComponentStyles, CommonSize, PaletteType } from '@aesthetic/react';

export const styleSheet = createComponentStyles((css) => ({
  button: css.mixin('reset-button', {
    display: 'inline-flex',
    padding: css.var('spacing-df'),
    textAlign: 'center',

    '@variants': {
      'size:sm': { fontSize: css.var('text-sm-size') },
      'size:df': { fontSize: css.var('text-df-size') },
      'size:lg': { fontSize: css.var('text-lg-size') },

      'palette:brand': { backgroundColor: css.var('palette-brand-bg-base') },
      'palette:positive': { backgroundColor: css.var('palette-positive-bg-base') },
      'palette:warning': { backgroundColor: css.var('palette-warning-bg-base') },
    },
  }),
  button_disabled: {},
  button_selected: {},
  before: {},
  after: {},
  // ...
}));

export interface ButtonProps extends React.ButtonHTMLAttributes<HTMLButtonElement> {
  afterIcon?: React.ReactNode;
  beforeIcon?: React.ReactNode;
  children: NonNullable<React.ReactNode>;
  disabled?: boolean;
  palette?: PaletteType;
  selected?: boolean;
  size?: CommonSize;
}
```

<Tabs
  groupId="api-type"
  defaultValue="hook"
  values={[
    { label: 'Hook', value: 'hook' },
    { label: 'HOC', value: 'hoc' },
  ]}
>
  <TabItem value="hook">

```tsx {13}
import { useStyles } from '@aesthetic/react';

export default function Button({
  children,
  beforeIcon,
  afterIcon,
  disabled,
  selected,
  palette,
  size,
  ...props
}: ButtonProps) {
  const cx = useStyles(styleSheet);

  return (
    <button type="button" {...props} className={cx('button')} disabled={disabled}>
      {beforeIcon && <span className={cx('before')}>{beforeIcon}</span>}
      {children}
      {afterIcon && <span className={cx('after')}>{afterIcon}</span>}
    </button>
  );
}
```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="hoc">

```tsx {9}
import { withStyles, WithStylesWrappedProps } from '@aesthetic/react';

class Button extends React.Component<
  ButtonProps &
    WithStylesWrappedProps<'button' | 'button_disabled' | 'button_selected' | 'before' | 'after'>
> {
  render() {
    const {
      compose: cx,
      children,
      beforeIcon,
      afterIcon,
      disabled,
      selected,
      palette,
      size,
      ...props
    } = this.props;

    return (
      <button type="button" {...props} className={cx('button')} disabled={disabled}>
        {beforeIcon && <span className={cx('before')}>{beforeIcon}</span>}
        {children}
        {afterIcon && <span className={cx('after')}>{afterIcon}</span>}
      </button>
    );
  }
}

export default withStyles(styleSheet)(Button);
```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

> If you're designing components for a library that'll be consumed externally, we suggest exporting
> the style sheet so that consumers may customize variants.

## Generating class names

Both the hook and HOC APIs provide a class name generation function that we aptly name `cx`. This
function requires a list of selector names (keys from the style sheet object) in which to render CSS
and apply a class name with, for example.

```tsx {11,17,20,22}
function Button({
  children,
  beforeIcon,
  afterIcon,
  disabled,
  selected,
  palette,
  size,
  ...props
}: ButtonProps) {
  const cx = useStyles(styleSheet);

  return (
    <button
      type="button"
      {...props}
      className={cx('button', selected && 'button_selected', disabled && 'button_disabled')}
      disabled={disabled}
    >
      {beforeIcon && <span className={cx('before')}>{beforeIcon}</span>}
      {children}
      {afterIcon && <span className={cx('after')}>{afterIcon}</span>}
    </button>
  );
}
```

As demonstrated above, the `button` selector will always be rendered. However, the `button_selected`
and `button_disabled` selectors will only be rendered when the button is conditionally updated via
the `selected` and `disabled` props respectively.

We can take this a step further by supporting
[variants](../../dev/css-in-js/style-sheets/components.md#variants). All that's required is to pass
an object as the _1st argument_ to `cx()` with the name of every variant, and the variant to
activate.

```tsx {7,8,11,17-22}
function Button({
  children,
  beforeIcon,
  afterIcon,
  disabled,
  selected,
  palette = 'primary',
  size = 'df',
  ...props
}: ButtonProps) {
  const cx = useStyles(styleSheet);

  return (
    <button
      type="button"
      {...props}
      className={cx(
        { size, palette },
        'button',
        selected && 'button_selected',
        disabled && 'button_disabled',
      )}
      disabled={disabled}
    >
      {beforeIcon && <span className={cx('before')}>{beforeIcon}</span>}
      {children}
      {afterIcon && <span className={cx('after')}>{afterIcon}</span>}
    </button>
  );
}
```

> NOTE: The order of selectors passed to `cx()` does not determine the specificity. The order they
> are defined in the style sheet does! Be aware of this when developing.

## Alternative styling

Besides the `useStyles` hook, there is a special `useCss` hook, which is a low-level alternative for
rendering a basic [rule object](../../packages/style/concepts.md#styles) and returning a class name.

```tsx
import React, { useMemo } from 'react';
import { useCss } from '@aesthetic/react';

function Button({ children }: ButtonProps) {
  // Memoize the styles to avoid unnecessary renders
  const styles = useMemo(
    () => ({
      display: 'inline-flex',
      padding: 8,
      textAlign: 'center',
    }),
    [],
  );

  // Immediately render and return a class name
  const className = useCss(styles);

  return (
    <button type="button" className={className}>
      {children}
    </button>
  );
}
```

Be aware that this hook _**does not**_ use the
[component style sheet](../../dev/css-in-js/style-sheets/components.md) format and instead uses
plain [style objects](../../packages/style/concepts.md#styles)! Because of this, the following
features are no longer available:

- Theme object and utility functions
- Structured style blocks
- Variant styles
- Styling multiple elements
- Re-rendering when theme or direction change
- Class name composition
- High-performance and caching
- And other design system related features...

Commit message:

docs: Add custom class/style blurb.

docs/integrations/react/styles.mdx, after:

---
title: Styling components
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

> Knowledge of [style sheets](../../dev/css-in-js/style-sheets.md) is required.

Components are styled with the `useStyles()` hook (preferred) or the `withStyles()`
higher-order-component. Both APIs require a
[style sheet](../../dev/css-in-js/style-sheets/components.md) that is conditionally rendered to CSS
to generate atomic class names.

To continue with the example found in the style sheet documentation, let's design and style a button
component. The button file would look something like the following.

```tsx {4}
import React from 'react';
import { createComponentStyles, CommonSize, PaletteType } from '@aesthetic/react';

export const styleSheet = createComponentStyles((css) => ({
  button: css.mixin('reset-button', {
    display: 'inline-flex',
    padding: css.var('spacing-df'),
    textAlign: 'center',

    '@variants': {
      'size:sm': { fontSize: css.var('text-sm-size') },
      'size:df': { fontSize: css.var('text-df-size') },
      'size:lg': { fontSize: css.var('text-lg-size') },

      'palette:brand': { backgroundColor: css.var('palette-brand-bg-base') },
      'palette:positive': { backgroundColor: css.var('palette-positive-bg-base') },
      'palette:warning': { backgroundColor: css.var('palette-warning-bg-base') },
    },
  }),
  button_disabled: {},
  button_selected: {},
  before: {},
  after: {},
  // ...
}));

export interface ButtonProps extends React.ButtonHTMLAttributes<HTMLButtonElement> {
  afterIcon?: React.ReactNode;
  beforeIcon?: React.ReactNode;
  children: NonNullable<React.ReactNode>;
  disabled?: boolean;
  palette?: PaletteType;
  selected?: boolean;
  size?: CommonSize;
}
```

<Tabs
  groupId="api-type"
  defaultValue="hook"
  values={[
    { label: 'Hook', value: 'hook' },
    { label: 'HOC', value: 'hoc' },
  ]}
>
  <TabItem value="hook">

```tsx {13}
import { useStyles } from '@aesthetic/react';

export default function Button({
  children,
  beforeIcon,
  afterIcon,
  disabled,
  selected,
  palette,
  size,
  ...props
}: ButtonProps) {
  const cx = useStyles(styleSheet);

  return (
    <button type="button" {...props} className={cx('button')} disabled={disabled}>
      {beforeIcon && <span className={cx('before')}>{beforeIcon}</span>}
      {children}
      {afterIcon && <span className={cx('after')}>{afterIcon}</span>}
    </button>
  );
}
```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="hoc">

```tsx {9}
import { withStyles, WithStylesWrappedProps } from '@aesthetic/react';

class Button extends React.Component<
  ButtonProps &
    WithStylesWrappedProps<'button' | 'button_disabled' | 'button_selected' | 'before' | 'after'>
> {
  render() {
    const {
      compose: cx,
      children,
      beforeIcon,
      afterIcon,
      disabled,
      selected,
      palette,
      size,
      ...props
    } = this.props;

    return (
      <button type="button" {...props} className={cx('button')} disabled={disabled}>
        {beforeIcon && <span className={cx('before')}>{beforeIcon}</span>}
        {children}
        {afterIcon && <span className={cx('after')}>{afterIcon}</span>}
      </button>
    );
  }
}

export default withStyles(styleSheet)(Button);
```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

> If you're designing components for a library that'll be consumed externally, we suggest exporting
> the style sheet so that consumers may customize variants.

## Generating class names

Both the hook and HOC APIs provide a class name generation function that we aptly name `cx`. This
function requires a list of selector names (keys from the style sheet object) in which to render CSS
and apply a class name with, for example.

```tsx {11,17,20,22}
function Button({
  children,
  beforeIcon,
  afterIcon,
  disabled,
  selected,
  palette,
  size,
  ...props
}: ButtonProps) {
  const cx = useStyles(styleSheet);

  return (
    <button
      type="button"
      {...props}
      className={cx('button', selected && 'button_selected', disabled && 'button_disabled')}
      disabled={disabled}
    >
      {beforeIcon && <span className={cx('before')}>{beforeIcon}</span>}
      {children}
      {afterIcon && <span className={cx('after')}>{afterIcon}</span>}
    </button>
  );
}
```

As demonstrated above, the `button` selector will always be rendered. However, the `button_selected`
and `button_disabled` selectors will only be rendered when the button is conditionally updated via
the `selected` and `disabled` props respectively.

We can take this a step further by supporting
[variants](../../dev/css-in-js/style-sheets/components.md#variants). All that's required is to pass
an object as the _1st argument_ to `cx()` with the name of every variant, and the variant to
activate.

```tsx {7,8,11,17-22}
function Button({
  children,
  beforeIcon,
  afterIcon,
  disabled,
  selected,
  palette = 'primary',
  size = 'df',
  ...props
}: ButtonProps) {
  const cx = useStyles(styleSheet);

  return (
    <button
      type="button"
      {...props}
      className={cx(
        { size, palette },
        'button',
        selected && 'button_selected',
        disabled && 'button_disabled',
      )}
      disabled={disabled}
    >
      {beforeIcon && <span className={cx('before')}>{beforeIcon}</span>}
      {children}
      {afterIcon && <span className={cx('after')}>{afterIcon}</span>}
    </button>
  );
}
```

> NOTE: The order of selectors passed to `cx()` does not determine the specificity. The order they
> are defined in the style sheet does! Be aware of this when developing.

### Custom class names

You can pass non-Aesthetic class names to `cx()` by passing an array.

```ts
cx('button', ['custom-class-name']);
```

## Alternative styling

Besides the `useStyles` hook, there is a special `useCss` hook, which is a low-level alternative for
rendering a basic [rule object](../../packages/style/concepts.md#styles) and returning a class name.

```tsx
import React, { useMemo } from 'react';
import { useCss } from '@aesthetic/react';

function Button({ children }: ButtonProps) {
  // Memoize the styles to avoid unnecessary renders
  const styles = useMemo(
    () => ({
      display: 'inline-flex',
      padding: 8,
      textAlign: 'center',
    }),
    [],
  );

  // Immediately render and return a class name
  const className = useCss(styles);

  return (
    <button type="button" className={className}>
      {children}
    </button>
  );
}
```

Be aware that this hook _**does not**_ use the
[component style sheet](../../dev/css-in-js/style-sheets/components.md) format and instead uses
plain [style objects](../../packages/style/concepts.md#styles)! Because of this, the following
features are no longer available:

- Theme object and utility functions
- Structured style blocks
- Variant styles
- Styling multiple elements
- Re-rendering when theme or direction change
- Class name composition
- High-performance and caching
- And other design system related features...
